thank so much for having me it's so
great to be back at the gray area
festival I've had like the wonderful
privilege of speaking here a couple
times before I want to start by giving
some special acknowledgement to my
colleagues from yah wolf who are here
there I think there's something like
seven of us thanks so much for for being
in the room and I'm really excited to
hang out with you in San Francisco and
of course I have to give a really
special shout out to my colleagues Cara
kiddo and learn casein from our XR team
who helped me write this talk and so
okay so I'm just gonna be with some
really really quick background about me
I'm an art historian I'm a curator I've
been working in the field for about 15
years I worked here with their
artist-in-residence program and read a
critical research lab I've had the
privilege of doing a lot of work with
artists made games with this
organization and I worked in the
educational department at this Museum of
Contemporary Art in Los Angeles for a
couple years as well and I'm currently
participating in a three-year fellowship
with these organizations over here but I
currently work as strategic partnerships
manager at a place called with me a wolf
which is an artist driven immersive
experience company based in Santa Fe New
Mexico
so actually I'm not gonna speak very
much about that today but if you'd like
to learn more by all means please grab
me for questions or better yet ask some
of my many many colleagues who are here
with us right so what am I going to talk
about today so today I'm going to talk
about the future I'm gonna talk about
immersive design but most importantly
I'm going to talk about bathrooms and
I'm gonna do this in three short very
simple parts but right yes
bathrooms we all know bathrooms are very
important they serve several of our most
basic needs and their spaces we engage
with every single day they're often also
small somewhat contained spaces which
makes them ideal environments for
immersive design both metaphorically and
literally and of course there are a
small number of artists working in the
bathroom space I'm a very big fan of
this piece by Mauricio Catalan
it's titled America and of course like
every seemingly other part of
contemporary life bathrooms are a
landscape for groundbreaking
technological innovation like this next
gen kohler toilet and its accompanying
app I really like this toilet because
it's kind of coy like it's like it's
like winking at you this is an
interactive project that's designed to
project an interactive screen on the
surface of your bath water for those of
you who are sick of getting your iPads
all soggy and while I would love to riff
on bathrooms all day I actually want to
tell you a story about my mom my mom was
called Jeannette she I was one of five
kids and a like middle middle-class
household in Los Angeles very close to
the airport near LAX she was a very
bright person she's super super smart
she was a voracious reader she could be
extremely funny very very sharp and also
sometimes a little mean you put all
these things together you had a very
brilliant complex and sometimes
mysterious person my mom was also a
public school teacher for over 30 years
in the LA Unified School District and
she spent most of those years at receipt
of high school which is in the suburbs
of Los Angeles this could be a pretty
rough school and she taught in a lot of
the kind of tougher areas of Los Angeles
and she was only five feet tall she
weighs about a hundred pounds but when
she needed to she could really put the
fear of God into somebody she could she
could put it together now when I was a
little kid about six or seven I went
with my mom to work at Reseda high
school and she took me into the teachers
lounge with her and she took me into the
bathroom in the teachers lounge and
while we were in there very serious look
comes across her face and she placed
both hands on my shoulder and she said
Sarah I have a very important question
for you and I want you to think about
your answer very carefully when you grow
up do you want to have a bathroom like
this or do you want a nice clean
bathroom like your pediatrician dr.
Smith and of course I was terrified and
I was like dr. Smith dr. Smith uh and so
I I didn't know what's going on at the
time and so this happened almost 30
years ago but I think about it
constantly now you know parents and well
I certainly didn't understand what she
was trying to say at the time I
understand now that this was her way of
trying to get me to understand something
of the utmost importance she was trying
to explain to me in real palpable terms
that being a teacher was difficult and
punishing and not the kind of life she
wanted me to have she wanted me to
understand that if I wanted to spend my
adult life in a clean comfortable and
safe place I would need to plan for that
and to make very specific and deliberate
choices different from hers she was
trying to get me to think about the
future okay that takes me to part two of
my talk now it might not come as a
surprise to you based on my description
of her that my mom could be a very
polemical person she loved fiercely but
she also fought fiercely too and was
extremely stubborn which of course meant
that she had in our nemesis obviously as
all people have note to you and her arch
nemesis was this guy this guy is called
David Brin he's my uncle he's my dad's
brother he's not really in my life but
I'm sure some of you in the audience
only know him and I'm sure he's a
perfectly okay guy but he's a capital F
futurist and he does all the futurist
things like Chuck on panels and make
conjectures and write and edit books
about the future and growing up
I would go to places like comic-con and
to me with him and all of his futurist
and sci-fi writers and friends and
somewhere along the line just meaning
all of these people I just decided like
oh this is what a futurist is this is
what science fiction is and it's boring
like it's not it's not for me I didn't
see myself in it and I was like okay
whatever but around 2013 how many years
after that which is actually the year my
mom died I decided to do an experiment
and that experiment was to completely
stop reading books written by people who
looked like my futurist uncle and I
exclusively start reading fiction
written by people like Octavia Butler
Margaret Atwood Colson whitehead
Naomi alderman and basically by anyone
else who was an assistant cisgendered
white guy with a goatee and shortly
after that I started to understand why
and how it was so powerful to imagine
the future and what my mom was trying to
get me to think about so long ago in the
bathroom and I realized that even though
neither she nor I had the requisite
facial hair that we could think about
the future too no one had any one right
one method or recipe or answer for
thinking about what the world would
become I could think about the future
just as well as anyone else could with a
little practice I got pretty okay at
forecasting my own field kind of
thinking about like what the trends
would be or like you know what the
future of art might look like but when I
tried to do this for myself for my own
personal life I found this to be an
extremely painful exercise why because
the future is embarrassing at least it
is for me personally I find that wanting
things it's very embarrassing needing
things is even worse especially if
they're like things like owning a home
or finding a partner or having money
because at least for me there's a
subtext there and that subtext says if
you deserved those things you'd already
have them and that's really messed up
it's completely wrong it's that's that's
it's broken
and after I realize this that's when I
started to get excited because something
I know about embarrassment is that
embarrassment is hegemonic embarrassment
is there to make us ashamed to talk
about really really important things
like our bodies our feelings our capital
a lot of which I feel is
underrepresented within certain
discourses of futurism and embarrassment
is what makes some of us feel like we're
not qualified at you predict imagine or
build the future so now that I realize
this I get really excited because I'm
embarrassed and and I know that because
I'm embarrassed I can now be confident
that probably lots of other people are
also embarrassed and anxious and
probably very scared about a lot of the
same things as I am so suddenly I'm not
alone anymore now I want to do a little
experiment and it might go very wrong so
let's see what happens so if all of us
take just just a couple seconds to think
about the future and some of our
anxieties and current concerns
surrounding that I want you to take a
moment to yourselves think of the
biggest most pressing most terrifying
concern you have about the future and
we're all gonna say them out loud on the
count of three we're ready okay
one two three climate emergency cool
congratulations I think real futurists
now please feel free to pat yourself on
the back or perhaps about yourselves a
Tesla and this takes me to the last part
of my talk okay team we have a problem
and that problem is called a mersive
design which is why a lot of us are here
today it's one of the
theme to this conference which is great
and a lot of us are here because we make
or study or actively participate in
immersive experiences or we work in
proximity to the tools and practitioners
that shape this discourse and so I have
a question I need to post to you all
when we produce or engage with our Civ
do we do it to imagine a more positive
survivable future or do we do it to
temporarily find respite from the dire
crises of our present moment I think
there's room for both but I'm very
concerned about our methods for
approaching the former and so how do we
do this how do we start how do we
approach immersive experiences for
audiences whether they're literal
audiences or clients or students or
co-workers or family members what are
the ingredients for galvanizing those
people to feel ownership of the future
to realize that they're qualified to
realize that they're not alone to
realize they shouldn't be embarrassed or
ashamed to actively vocally want to feel
ownership for the future to hope for it
and to help build it I think we need to
approach this rigorously and
scientifically and I'm seeing this in my
own background as a humanist it's very
easy to get hand-wavy about this real
fast but I'm really happy that gray area
is doing this some of this work in
partnership with a knight Foundation and
so in an attempt to kind of like
casually feebly push this discourse
forward I'm gonna very briefly highlight
three projects that I think do this in
really interesting ways this is an
immersive experience called black power
naps by Neve Acosta and Fanny Sousa who
assert that Society relaxation and rest
is a luxury reserved for the privileged
and rich so taking into consideration
the fact that there is a sleep gap and
of course sleep is a really big factor
in our stress our health the ways we
think recent studies have shown that the
distribution of rest is determined by
race what people of color regularly
getting less sleep than white people and
what black power naps does is reclaim
idleness and play as sources of power
and strength by inviting people of color
to break with constant
Teague by slowing down resting and
interacting with soft comfortable
surfaces like a black bean bath and I
will briefly briefly talk about one yeah
wolf thing I are the imbrue umbrellas
sister is created by a Tyler English
Beckwith and Hakim edamame and they are
an afro-futurist intervention within our
flagship exhibition the house of eternal
return in Santa Fe and I can talk about
this a little bit with it without any
kind of major spoilers I one thing that
I think is really cool about the
exhibition is that it's it's designed so
that we can kind of like integrate new
artworks and push the narratives forward
so like the visit your visit to the
exhibition can be different when you
come back and so this is kind of one of
the more the recent additions to the
narrative and there are so who the Unruh
sisters are their three women from 50
years in the future who appear in the
house through digital portals they show
up in a series of videos on screens in
the exhibit and online taking the form
of black female icons with a message
urging participants to take action and
halt a coming apocalypse and finally
Robin fro Hearts the plastic bag store
which is an installation and puppetry
based immersive play that hinges on the
premise that future archaeologic are
archaeologists discover hordes of
plastic waste and decide that these
discarded plastic objects must have been
of great cultural significance they're
trying to figure out what you know well
what was the mystery and and the
participants kind of wander through
space and there's a bunch of different
objects in the space that are kind of
made by repurposed plastic objects and
it's pretty special
okay so just by a very preliminary look
at these projects some common themes I'm
kind of seeing here in in these in my
opinion very impactful pieces is that
they straddle a line between silly and
serious and bounce between those poles
right they're not just kind of one
channel only individuals are directly
addressed by the artists and performers
highlighting the individuals agency
ability and actions to kind of engage
with the information and space and
objects in their proximity and of course
all three projects are discoverable
participants
encouraged you physically engage with
the objects in the space using there's
multiple senses to explore okay so
obviously there are lots of other
qualities and projects that I'm not
talking about here a lot but when I'm
trying to emphasize is that we can't
just be subtle about our design
objectives we can't just like assume
that everyone's on the same page as us
we have to be forthcoming and so today
with our peers our colleagues some of
the greatest minds working in this space
in this room today in San Francisco
we're in a city where some might say
some of the most devastating and
terrifying aspects of apocalyptic
fiction have already come alive a city
that some may say has prioritized
economic growth far beyond any other
human interest we cannot afford to be
embarrassed or subtle about our deepest
fears or our greatest dreams for the
future there is so much power tied to
the act of dreamings with colleagues and
friends because that can so easily
become and transform into building with
friends and with newly adopted families
and so in closing I leave you all with
one final question do you want this to
be your bathroom when you grow up or do
you want a bathroom that's just that's
sustainable and equitable and beautiful
and survivable choose wisely
[Applause]